yep there's ice
all around as far as the eye can see
a white desert covers the entrance to
your cave
the one where you and a bunch of other
settlers live
everyone's gathered around a fire pit
trying to keep warm
telling each other stories about how
much snow they saw the other day
some are running around playing tag
throwing sticks
whatever people used to do for fun 300
000 years ago you're one of the earliest
homo sapiens to ever walk the earth
others are sleeping or just resting
their eyes
all around the cave all you can hear are
stomachs rumbling
sounds like a wild animal lurking around
you look out the mouth of the cave and
see that the storm has cleared
time to grab some tools and head out as
a group
in the open wilderness you find some
berries covered in snow
and plants that might be edible
but it's not enough to feed the whole
tribe
it's the ice age and there's not much
vegetation growing anywhere
one of your friends spots some large
footprints in the snow
the chase is on you can't tell what it
is
but it should be enough to feed everyone
for a couple of days
as you go deeper into the snow-covered
forest you hear a growl behind you
you hope it's your stomach but you look
behind you
and suddenly black out
an ice age is a period when large sheets
of ice cover everything
changing the earth permanently it's
partly responsible for the raising and
lowering of sea levels
as well as the current layout of the
continents
picture monster thick ice sheets spread
across what's now
canada scandinavia russia and even south
america
that's all caused sea levels to change
drastically
and temperatures around the world fell
dramatically
and i'm not talking about just one ice
age
there were a bunch of them scientists
say there have been
five major ice ages throughout history
lasting for millions of years
and we're in the middle of one right now
relax don't panic it doesn't mean we're
all going to be sleeping next to
bonfires
trying to keep warm after being out all
day looking for woolly mammoths
and no there won't be a massive
geological ice storm
that freezes everything in its path ice
ages have warmer periods in them that
come and go
lasting for tens of thousands of years
in fact billions of years ago the earth
was one
giant snowball with no life on it and
the sun back then
was also just a cute little fireball
without enough heat to melt all that ice
but as the sun got bigger and hotter
earth's eye
slowly melted away leaving the green and
blue ball
we have today we're living in the
quaternary ice age
that's been going on for the past 2.6
million years
and counting some animals have thrived
in this latest ice age
like whales and sharks they've been at
the top of the food chain for ages
under them are seals certain kinds of
fish otters
all the way down to tiny plankton
[Music]
up on the cold surface mammals had to
grow thick and shaggy fur
just to stay warm ancient mammoths
rhinos and bison
were known to have thick rugs on them
they looked awesome
they were herbivores and ate small
shrubs and
whatever grass they could find but
several
thousand years ago temperatures began to
rise
and most of these animals became extinct
the ones that remained
evolved into the elephants hippos and
rhinos we have today
[Music]
you wake up from your blackout and find
yourself face to face
with a creature that kind of looks like
a modern day bobcat
except it's much bigger and furier
it's a smilodon an epic version of a
saber-toothed cat
with a mean look it's around the same
size as a male lion
and has two front fangs that make me
think twice before leaving the safety of
my cave
they look scary but scientists think
their bite wasn't as powerful as today's
tigers or lions
what made them tough were their giant
forearms used to wrestle down
anyone who got on their nerves in packs
they were even able to take down
mammoths
either way you don't want to be waking
up next to this kitty
it's staring you down ready to pounce
but
you and your friends keep calm and
slowly back off
you get the genius idea to throw a rock
to distract it
then run nowadays it's near impossible
for a human to outsprint a lion or tiger
but humans back then were much fitter
once the danger is over everyone
continues to look for food
it's getting dark and you haven't found
anything to bring back to the cave
suddenly you smell something burning
way off in the distance you see a thin
column of smoke rising into the sky
another settlement you and your friends
look at each other
and approach the smoke cautiously
homo sapiens first came into being about
two or three hundred years ago
but human history didn't just pop up out
of nowhere
as far back as seven million years ago
some of us decided to
call it quits we left our chimpanzee
ancestors in the jungle
and started doing our own thing and that
didn't just happen once
over those next millions of years there
were over 20 different human species
some were our ancestors some were twigs
from a completely different branch
some were tiny others better adapted for
hot or cold weather
before you know it you see a group of
neanderthals cooking some meat
sharpening their tools neanderthals were
the first to migrate to europe
scientists believe they were around
somewhere between forty thousand to four
hundred thousand years ago
they occupied all areas between europe
and asia
while homo sapiens that's us we're still
all the way down in africa you enter
their camp
and immediately see the differences
between each other
they're stocky and look a bit different
but there are some similarities
like flat teeth for chewing and gnawing
and big skulls for their big brains
they even have clothes on like you
according to archaeologists
they lived in shelters and made tools
out of stone sticks and bones
they welcome you inside and give you a
tour like no
other you're officially meeting another
human species
they take you inside their cave and show
you some of their cave paintings
they were the first artists of their
time many of their galleries are still
around today
like the ones in caves in spain you know
their style
minimalist paintings of deer a large
handprint
they also dabbled a bit in jewelry
making they made necklaces out of eagle
talons and animal fangs
they were also probably the first ones
to harness the power of fire
did they discover it when a bolt of
lightning hit a tree
or when one of them dropped a rock on
another rock creating a spark
no one really knows but they were able
to recreate it
and use it to keep warm to cook food to
see in the darkness
and to protect themselves after the nice
tour
you hang around the campfire to keep
warm they even offer you some extra
clothes for their journey home
mostly thick shaggy mammoth coats if
only you could talk to each other
that would be awesome but it's getting
dark
and you need to head back to the tribe
you say your goodbyes
and thank them for teaching you how to
draw a deer and for that sack of food
they gave you
the ice age was important for the
development of the modern homo sapiens
because of the extreme cold and other
harsh conditions
they had to adapt to survive be extra
clever and
innovative they developed advanced tools
and even used bone needles to sew warm
clothing
they may have hosted the first ever
runway show
[Music]
when the climate started to get warmer
they developed farming techniques to
sustain themselves
and mainly settle near large bodies of
water like rivers or lakes
while others opted to be near seas and
oceans
they i mean we were even the first to
domesticate
animals fast forward a few hundred
thousand years
and here we are